Created enhancement doc to customize perspectives (#1205)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/console/customize-perspectives.md

---
title: customize-perspectives
authors:
  - "@lokanandaprabhu"
reviewers:
  - "@jerolimov"
  - "@spadgett"
approvers:
  - "@spadgett"
  - "@cvogt"
api-approvers:
  - "@jerolimov"
  - "@cvogt"
creation-date: 2022-07-26
last-updated: 2022-08-02
tracking-link: 
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/ODC-6695
status: implementable
---

# Customize Perspectives 

## Summary

This document provides details about how cluster administrator 
can hide user perspectives. 

## Motivation

Cluster administrator wants to hide the "Administrator" perspective 
from non-privileged or all users and to hide the "Developer" 
perspective for all users.

> ### User Stories

Reviewer: I would add a story for an admin to hide any perspective contributed by a plugin.

#### Story 1

As a cluster admin, I want to hide "Administrator" perspective 
from all non-privileged users. Non-privileged users are users that cannot get
all `namespaces` (based on RBAC check)

#### Story 2

As a cluster admin, I want to hide "Administrator" perspective
for all users.

#### Story 3

As a cluster admin, I want to hide "Developer" perspective
for all users.

### Goals

- Allow cluster admins to hide the user perspectives.
- Provide a way that cluster admins can do this based on resource permissions (RBAC).

### Non-Goals

N/A

## Proposal

We can extend the existing `operator.openshift.io/v1` / `Console` CRD. 
We can add 
`spec.customization.perspectives` which can have list of customization details.

### Workflow Description

To disable perspective for users with limited permissions we need a list of options with a perspective name and the required permissions.

```text
├── Spec
│   ├── customization
|       ├── perspectives 

> |           ├── name

Reviewer: What is the console behavior when we encounter a perspective `name` that is not known? Is it simply ignored?

Reviewer 2: Yes :)

|           ├── requiresAccessReview
|               ├── kind
|               ├── verb
└── ...
```

> This might be extendable in the future if we want replace (hide one, show another) a perspective based on a resource permissions:

Reviewer: It's unclear to me based whether we plan to support `missingAccessReview` now or if it's only something planned for the future.

Author: missingAccessReview is something we thought of adding in future.

Reviewer 2: To be clear here: We want to add this feature now, but its not required to archive this:

1. Cluster administrator is able to “hide” the admin perspective from non-privileged users.
2. Cluster administrator is able to “hide” the developer perspective for all users.

But its required for the case that a cluster admin wants to show an *alternative* perspective for users *with* special privileges ("show for non-privileged").

```text
├── Spec
│   ├── customization
|       ├── perspectives 
|           ├── name
|           ├── requiresAccessReview
|           |   ├── kind
|           |   ├── verb
|           ├── missingAccessReview
|               ├── kind
|               ├── verb
└── ...
```

> Each perspective conforms to the following schema:

Reviewer: `name` is not described in the properties below.

Reviewer 2: IMHO: We should call the reference here `id` to match the Perspective extension which has an `id` and a display name and I would expect that we want compare this with the `id`.

See https://github.com/openshift/console/blob/master/frontend/packages/console-dynamic-plugin-sdk/src/extensions/perspectives.ts#L11-L14

> - `disabled?: boolean` , define if the perspective is never shown

Reviewer: Booleans are discouraged in APIs, so we'd want an enum value instead.

https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#primitive-types

Reviewer: I would use "(optional)" here instead of "?" as not everyone is familiar with TypeScript syntax.

Reviewer 2: Hey @spadgett, good hint with the boolean. I see at least three options:

1. Keep boolean as it is still used for other enabled attributes, etc.
2. Just use `disabled` with `True` and `False` strings (defined as enum) for now. Similar to `Status corev1.ConditionStatus` but without `Unknown`
3. Or also switch the key to something that give us more options in the future. Enabled? Status? Visible?

For me personally everything is fine. Sam, should we go with number two for now? A disabled enum with `True` and `False`?

Reviewer: I suspect it won't pass API review if we leave it a boolean, even if we have other boolean flags in the config. I'd suggest something like `state: {Enabled,Disabled}` for now, and we can work with the API reviewers on the best option when we have the openshift/api PR open.

---
title: customize-perspectives
authors:
  - "@lokanandaprabhu"
reviewers:
  - "@jerolimov"
  - "@spadgett"
approvers:
  - "@spadgett"
  - "@cvogt"
api-approvers:
  - "@jerolimov"

>   - "@cvogt"

Reviewer 3: API approvers should be from the API review team, this would likely be myself or @deads2k

creation-date: 2022-07-26
last-updated: 2022-08-24
tracking-link: 
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/ODC-6695
status: implementable
---

# Customize Perspectives 

## Summary

> This document provides details about how cluster administrator 

Reviewer 3: It would be good to know what a user perspective is.

> In the OpenShift Developer Console, Perspectives are ...

Author: Added the screenshot

can hide user perspectives. 

## Motivation

Cluster administrator wants to hide the "Administrator" perspective 
from non-privileged or all users and to hide the "Developer" 

> perspective for all users.

Reviewer 3: This is the what, tell me why they want to do this?

Reviewer 3: You should expand on this in the document as this is the record of our intent for this feature.

### User Stories

> #### Story 1

Reviewer 3: A user story typically looks like `<someone> wants to be able to <something>, so that they can <something>`, think of it as a who, what and why. Currently, you're missing the `so that they can <something>` from your stories. Please tell me why this is important and why the user would want to these things

As a cluster admin, I want to hide "Administrator" perspective 
from all non-privileged users. Non-privileged users are users that cannot get
all `namespaces` (based on RBAC check)

#### Story 2

As a cluster admin, I want to hide "Developer" perspective
for all users.

#### Story 3

As a cluster admin, I want to hide any perspective contributed by a plugin.

Additional perspectives can be dynamically added with the 
[Perspective extension](https://github.com/openshift/console/blob/master/frontend/packages/console-dynamic-plugin-sdk/src/extensions/perspectives.ts).

### Goals

- Allow cluster admins to hide the user perspectives.
- Provide a way that cluster admins can do this based on resource permissions (RBAC).

### Non-Goals

> N/A

Reviewer 3: It's abnormal to not have any non-goals, what is out of scope here?

```text
├── Spec
│   ├── customization
|       ├── perspectives 
|           ├── id
|           ├── requiresAccessReview
|               ├── kind
|               ├── verb
└── ...
```

This might be extendable in the future if we want replace (hide one, show another) a perspective based on a resource permissions:

```text
├── Spec
│   ├── customization
|       ├── perspectives 
|           ├── id
|           ├── requiresAccessReview
|           |   ├── kind
|           |   ├── verb
|           ├── missingAccessReview
|               ├── kind
|               ├── verb
└── ...
```

Each perspective conforms to the following schema:

- `id: string` , defines the id of perspective to disable. Incorrect or unknown ids will be ignored.

// +optional
- `requiresAccessReview: authV1.ResourceAttributes[]` , defines a list of permission checks. The perspective will only be shown when all checks are successful.

// +optional
- `missingAccessReview: authV1.ResourceAttributes[]` , defines a list of permission checks. The perspective will only be shown when at least one check fails.

> ### API Extensions

Reviewer 3: If you can add a block with the go structure for the new fields then this can help API reviewers to provide feedback. Then you should be able to copy/paste it straight into the API repo

Author: <img width="1002" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/102503482/186682303-567760de-d187-4eb8-8a75-c905715686be.png">

Hi @JoelSpeed ,

Is this the go structure you are expecting ? Or am I missing anything?

Reviewer: @lokanandaprabhu This is referring to the actual Go code we'll add to this struct:

https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/master/operator/v1/types_console.go#L90

Reviewer 3: Yeah it would be good to see the full go struct as then we can discuss the appropriate go markers and documentation that will go into the product via the generated docs

Extend the existing `operator.openshift.io/v1` / `Console` CRD to add `spec.customization.perspectives` which can have list of customization details.

So the final yaml should look like this one:

```yaml
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: Console
metadata: 
  name: cluster
  ...
spec:
  customization:
    perspectives:
      - id: admin
        requiresAccessReview:
          - kind: namespaces
            verb: list
      - id: dev
        state: Enabled/Disabled
```

Example yaml based on resource permission:

```yaml
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: Console
metadata: 
  name: cluster
  ...
spec:
  customization:
    perspectives:
      - id: admin
        requiresAccessReview:
          - kind: namespaces
            verb: list
      - id: minimal-custom-admin
        missingAccessReview:
          - kind: namespaces
            verb: list
```
### Risks and Mitigations

> **Default perspective**: When all the perspectives are hidden from a user or for all users, we always show Admin perspective by default and if admin has to 

Reviewer 3: I'm guessing that the motivation behind this is a security one? This seems like a security flaw, how will you mitigate it?

Reviewer: It's not a security issue. It's more about what is the behavior if an admin tries to disable all perspectives? You have to have at least one perspective to see anything in the console left nav.

The perspectives themselves hide/show elements based on the user's permissions (and of course the API server enforces RBAC as well).

Reviewer 3: Ack ok, so the motivation here is that, if an admin misconfigures the perspectives, they need access to the admin perspective to rectify that issue, so we show the admin perspective by default? 

Perhaps the console could show a warning when that happens?

Reviewer 3: This comment is still outstanding

revert back the changes, admin will update the yaml by removing specific perspective details. 

### Drawbacks

N/A

## Design Details

N/A

### Test Plan

> Testing will be carried out with the usual Console unit and e2e test suites.

Reviewer 3: Are there any specific test cases you can think of that you might want QE to run through, in particular I'm wondering about some of the cases mentioned above:
- What happens if the user doesn't have permissions
- What happens when all perspectives are hidden
- What happens if a plugin adds a perspective

### Graduation Criteria

> None

Reviewer 3: Is this being introduced straight to GA?

Author: Hi @spadgett ,

Can you provide information about this?

Reviewer: Yes, directly to GA.

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

N/A

#### Tech Preview -> GA

N/A

#### Removing a deprecated feature

N/A

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

**Upgrade**: If there is no customization details available, by default all perspectives will be visible. 

**Downgrade**: Will not look for customization details, by default all perspectives will be visible.

### Version Skew Strategy

None, console is the only consumer of this configuration.

### Operational Aspects of API Extensions

N/A
#### Failure Modes

N/A
#### Support Procedures

N/A

## Implementation History

N/A

## Alternatives

> - Allow the admin to define a list of enabled perspectives for users.

Reviewer 3: Or groups maybe?

---
title: customize-perspectives
authors:
  - "@lokanandaprabhu"
reviewers:
  - "@jerolimov"
  - "@spadgett"
approvers:
  - "@spadgett"
  - "@cvogt"
api-approvers:
  - "@jerolimov"
  - "@cvogt"
creation-date: 2022-07-26
last-updated: 2022-08-18
tracking-link: 
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/ODC-6695
status: implementable
---

# Customize Perspectives 

## Summary

This document provides details about how cluster administrator 
can hide user perspectives. 

## Motivation

Cluster administrator wants to hide the "Administrator" perspective 
from non-privileged or all users and to hide the "Developer" 
perspective for all users.

### User Stories

#### Story 1

As a cluster admin, I want to hide "Administrator" perspective 
from all non-privileged users. Non-privileged users are users that cannot get
all `namespaces` (based on RBAC check)

#### Story 2

As a cluster admin, I want to hide "Developer" perspective
for all users.

#### Story 3

> As a cluster admin, I want to hide any perspective contributed by a plugin.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a cluster admin, I want to hide any perspective contributed by a plugin.

Additional perspectives can be dynamically added with the [Perspective extension](https://github.com/openshift/console/blob/master/frontend/packages/console-dynamic-plugin-sdk/src/extensions/perspectives.ts).
```

### Goals

- Allow cluster admins to hide the user perspectives.
- Provide a way that cluster admins can do this based on resource permissions (RBAC).

### Non-Goals

N/A

## Proposal

We can extend the existing `operator.openshift.io/v1` / `Console` CRD. 
We can add 
`spec.customization.perspectives` which can have list of customization details.

### Workflow Description

> To disable perspective for users with limited permissions we need a list of options with a perspective name and the required permissions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To disable perspective for users with limited permissions we need a list of options with a perspective id and the required permissions.
```

```text
├── Spec
│   ├── customization
|       ├── perspectives 

> |           ├── name

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|           ├── id
```

|           ├── requiresAccessReview
|               ├── kind
|               ├── verb
└── ...
```

This might be extendable in the future if we want replace (hide one, show another) a perspective based on a resource permissions:

```text
├── Spec
│   ├── customization
|       ├── perspectives 

> |           ├── name

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|           ├── id
```

|           ├── requiresAccessReview
|           |   ├── kind
|           |   ├── verb
|           ├── missingAccessReview
|               ├── kind
|               ├── verb
└── ...
```

Each perspective conforms to the following schema:

> // +optional
> - `name: string` , defines the name of perspective to disable. If the name value is not known, it will be ignored.

Reviewer 2: As mentioned above, I would recommend to use `id` here instead of name so that it is clear that we compare this with the perspective id from https://github.com/openshift/console/blob/master/frontend/packages/console-dynamic-plugin-sdk/src/extensions/perspectives.ts#L11-L14

The name/ID should be required:

```suggestion
- `id: string` , defines the id of perspective to disable. Incorrect or unknown ids will be ignored.
```

N/A

#### Tech Preview -> GA

N/A

#### Removing a deprecated feature

N/A

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

**Upgrade**: If there is no customization details available, by default all perspectives will be visible. 

**Downgrade**: Will not look for customization details, by default all perspectives will be visible.

### Version Skew Strategy

None, console is the only consumer of this configuration.

### Operational Aspects of API Extensions

N/A
#### Failure Modes

N/A
#### Support Procedures

N/A

## Implementation History

N/A

## Alternatives

- Allow the admin to define a list of enabled perspectives for users.
- Enable plugins to specify required permissions for their perspectives.
- Other yaml options we can consider to customize perspectives:

**YAML Option 1** – Minimal version that just allow the cluster admin to 
disable one or more perspectives. This is similar to hide 
quick starts and items from the add page.

```yaml
spec:
  customization:
    perspectives:
      disabled:
        - “admin”
        - “dev”
```

But this doesn’t support additional permission checks.

**YAML Option 2** – To disable perspective for developers with limited 

> permissions we need a list of options with a perspective name and the 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
permissions we need a list of options with a perspective id and the 
```

required permissions. For example to disable the admin for users 
with limited permissions and dev for anyone.

```yaml
spec:
  customization:
    perspectives:
      disabled:
        - name: “admin”
          requiresAccessReview:
            - kind: namespaces
              verb: list
        - name: “dev”
```

**YAML Option 3** – Alternative we can use an object 

> structure where the perspective name is used as key:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
structure where the perspective id is used as key:
```

### Goals

- Allow cluster admins to hide the user perspectives.
- Provide a way that cluster admins can do this based on resource permissions (RBAC).

### Non-Goals

- Allow cluster admins to customize the navigation menu along with perspectives for users or groups.

## Proposal

We can extend the existing `operator.openshift.io/v1` / `Console` CRD. 
We can add 
`spec.customization.perspectives` which can have list of customization details.

### Workflow Description

To disable perspective for users with limited permissions we need a list of options with a perspective id and the required permissions.

```text
├── Spec
│   ├── customization
|       ├── perspectives 
|           ├── id
|           ├── requiresAccessReview
|               ├── kind
|               ├── verb
└── ...
```

This might be extendable in the future if we want replace (hide one, show another) a perspective based on a resource permissions:

```text
├── Spec
│   ├── customization
|       ├── perspectives 
|           ├── id
|           ├── requiresAccessReview
|           |   ├── kind
|           |   ├── verb
|           ├── missingAccessReview
|               ├── kind
|               ├── verb
└── ...

> ```

Reviewer 4: The other customizations that we have today have the structure
```
customization:
 developerCatalog:
  categories:
  - id:....

and

customization:
  projectAccess:
   availableClusterRoles:
   - ....

and

customization:
 addPage:
  disabledActions:
  - ....
```
So, shouldn't the structure here be something like
```
customization:
  perspectives: 
   <xyz>:
   - id:.....

or

customization:
 <xyz>:
    perspectives: 
    - id:.....
```
    
@spadgett @jerolimov

Each perspective conforms to the following schema:

- `id: string` , defines the id of perspective to disable. Incorrect or unknown ids will be ignored.

// +optional
- `requiresAccessReview: authV1.ResourceAttributes[]` , defines a list of permission checks. The perspective will only be shown when all checks are successful.

// +optional
- `missingAccessReview: authV1.ResourceAttributes[]` , defines a list of permission checks. The perspective will only be shown when at least one check fails.

// +optional
- `state: Enabled/Disabled` , defines the perspective is enabled or disabled.

### API Extensions

Extend the existing `operator.openshift.io/v1` / `Console` CRD to add `spec.customization.perspectives` which can have list of customization details.

So the final yaml should look like this one:

```yaml
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: Console
metadata: 
  name: cluster
  ...
spec:
  customization:
    perspectives:
      - id: admin

>         requiresAccessReview:

Reviewer 4: should this be `requiredAccessReview` or `requiresAccessReview` is fine?

  - "@lokanandaprabhu"
reviewers:
  - "@jerolimov"
  - "@spadgett"
approvers:
  - "@spadgett"
  - "@cvogt"
api-approvers:
  - "@JoelSpeed"
creation-date: 2022-07-26
last-updated: 2022-08-25
tracking-link: 
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/ODC-6695
status: implementable
---

# Customize Perspectives 

## Summary

OpenShift Container Platform (OCP) web console provides two perspectives: Administrator and Developer. 
The Developer perspective provides workflows specific to developer use cases 
like create, deploy and monitor applications, while Administrator perspective 
is responsible for managing the cluster resources, users, and projects.

This document provides details about how cluster administrator 
can hide user perspectives. 

![Perspectives switch dropdown](perspectives-switch.png)

## Motivation

Cluster administrator wants to hide the "Administrator" perspective 
from non-privileged and to hide the "Developer" 
perspective for all users.

### User Stories

#### Story 1

As a cluster admin, I want to hide "Administrator" perspective 
from all non-privileged users so that non-privileged users
cannot access "Administrator" perspective for managing the cluster resources, 

> users, and projects. Non-privileged users are users that cannot get

Reviewer 3: Strikes me as we want to hide this to avoid confusion? They could see that stuff but they don't have RBAC for it so couldn't interact with it, perhaps we can expand the why of this to include this idea?

Author: Yes, it's correct. User cannot break anything since we do RBAC check, we hide or disable buttons etc , we still get the feedback from customers that Administrator perspective is confusing for some developers. 

Currently all users have access to all perspectives and this might confuse some developers.

New perspectives could be added by the customer so they want to hide the default perspectives.

Reviewer 3: > Administrator perspective is confusing for some developers.

This is useful for the user stories section!

all `namespaces` (based on RBAC check)

#### Story 2

> As a cluster admin, I want to hide "Developer" perspective

Reviewer 3: Missing why you would want to do this

Author: Because the customers can add own perspectives and may be not interested in default perspective(developer perspective), cluster admins wants to disable the default perspective.

for all users.

#### Story 3

> As a cluster admin, I want to hide any perspective contributed by a plugin.

Reviewer 3: Because the plugin may not be relevant to certain users? Again, tell me why you want to do this

Author: A plugin can add multiple features to the console, the users are may be interested 
in other features of the plugin but not the perspective.

It might be also interesting for a customer to show this new perspective
only to users with specific permissions.

Reviewer 3: Useful context, please add to this user story

- Provide a way that cluster admins can do this based on resource permissions (RBAC).

### Non-Goals

- Allow cluster admins to customize the navigation menu along with perspectives for users or groups.

## Proposal

We can extend the existing `operator.openshift.io/v1` / `Console` CRD. 
We can add 
`spec.customization.perspectives` which can have list of customization details.

### Workflow Description

To disable perspective for users with limited permissions we need a list of options with a perspective id and the required permissions.

```text
├── Spec
│   ├── customization
|       ├── perspectives 
|           ├── id
|           ├── requiresAccessReview
|               ├── kind
|               ├── verb
└── ...
```

This might be extendable in the future if we want replace (hide one, show another) a perspective based on a resource permissions:

```text
├── Spec
│   ├── customization
|       ├── perspectives 
|           ├── id
|           ├── requiresAccessReview
|           |   ├── kind
|           |   ├── verb
|           ├── missingAccessReview
|               ├── kind
|               ├── verb
└── ...
```

Each perspective conforms to the following schema:

> - `id: string` , defines the id of perspective to disable. Incorrect or unknown ids will be ignored.

Reviewer 3: You should probably report this as an issue on the operator status no?

What will you do if a user specifies the same ID multiple times within the list? Are you planning to disallow that?

Author: Validating the console resource in the operator is really difficult  because the operator (go lang)
doesn't know the available perspectives provided by the console plugins (Javascript). 

I have added a Non-goal for this.

We might think about same ID check in the future but we don't have the admission controller in our operator yet.

@spadgett is this correct?

Reviewer: Right, the operator doesn't know unfortunately since perspectives can be added dynamically at runtime by plugins.

Reviewer 3: My question was about the Go type. You're adding a list to the Go type that is keyed on the `id`, so, this is a CRD in the cluster right? And an Admin is going to configure it with the required access reviews. So I would expect something in the cluster to be reconciling that object (maybe there isn't) and whatever is reconciling that could do the duplicates check and set an error somewhere?

Or is this CRD only loaded by the console frontend?

// +optional

> - `requiresAccessReview: authV1.ResourceAttributes[]` , defines a list of permission checks. The perspective will only be shown when all checks are successful.

Reviewer 3: Would be good to explain the use case for this and missing

It seems to me they are, show the perspective only when a use has all of these permissions, and then show the perspective whenever they have some of a list of permissions? 

How do the two interact together?

Reviewer 2: Hey, yes, both can work together esp. in the case where you want to show **another** perspective to users **without** specific permissions.

For example, a plugin or customer adds a new "Monitoring" perspective, which works only with specific permissions.

The admin can then define that this perspective is shown with some `requiresAccessReview` permissions.

But to show another **limited** "Monitoring" (same name, different ID!) perspective to all the others, the admin can define a `missingAccessReview` check so that the users without access to specific resources see it - but the users with access to the first "Monitoring" perspective doesn't see both.

Reviewer 3: OK that makes sense, please make sure to explain this within the enhancement!

Do you see a need to have a concept of `anyOf` and `allOf` within the access review? Allowing people to define, I want to show this perspective if they have all of these, or if they have any of these. Likewise with missing?

Author: Added in the document. 

For `anyOf` and `allOf`, it is a good idea to consider but we are not adding that for now. We will make use of `requiresAccessReview` and `missingAccessReview`.

Reviewer 3: Just to be clear, I'm assuming some conversation happened here. Is this something you might want to add in the future? If it's something you may want in the future we should design the API in a way that it's compatible to add this later, however, if it's something you never want, we don't need to consider it now.

// +optional
- `missingAccessReview: authV1.ResourceAttributes[]` , defines a list of permission checks. The perspective will only be shown when at least one check fails.

// +optional

> - `state: Enabled/Disabled` , defines the perspective is enabled or disabled.

Reviewer 3: How does this interact with the missing and required permissions?

Reviewer 2: for `missingAccessReview` see above.

for `state: Disabled`: This will always disable the perspective, independent from `requiresAccessReview` and `missingAccessReview`. An admission controller could check this, but we don't have one yet.

Reviewer 3: Right, in which case, we probably want to make this a [discriminated union](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/dev-guide/api-conventions.md#discriminated-unions), so you'd have something like
```
- id: <blah>
  visibility:
    state: Enabled # Always show this perspective
- id: <blah>
  visibility:
    state: Disabled # Never show this perspective
- id: <blah>
  visibility:
    state: AccessReview # Show the perspective based on the access review defined
    accessReview: # This section defines how the access review should work
      required: # Users then define the required permissions
         - <perms>
     missing: # And the missing permissions, and this is and'ed with the required(?)
         - <perms>
```
I'm also wondering if we need to have some sort of `AllOf`/`AnyOf` concept within the permission but we can discuss that separately

Author: Added the above structure by adding `visibility`. Thanks.

```text
├── Spec
│   ├── customization
|       ├── perspectives 
|           ├── id
|           ├── visibility
|               ├── state
|               ├── accessReview
|                   ├── requiresAccessReview
|                   |   ├── group
|                   |   ├── resource
|                   |   ├── verb
|                   ├── missingAccessReview
|                       ├── group
|                       ├── resource
|                       ├── verb
└── ...
```

Each perspective conforms to the following schema:

- `id: string` , defines the id of perspective to disable. Incorrect or unknown ids will be ignored.

- `visibility: object` , defines the state of perspective along with access review checks if needed for that perspective.

- `state: Enabled/Disabled/AccessReview` , defines the perspective is enabled or disabled or access review check is required.

// +optional
- `accessReview: object`, defines required and missing access review checks.

// +optional
- `requiresAccessReview: authV1.ResourceAttributes[]` , defines a list of permission checks. The perspective will only be shown when all checks are successful.

// +optional

> - `missingAccessReview: authV1.ResourceAttributes[]` , defines a list of permission checks. The perspective will only be shown when at least one check fails.

Reviewer 3: Do we require that at least one of `requiresAccessReview` and `missingAccessReview` are configured? What would happen if neither were configured?

Reviewer 3: Ignore the check and enable the perspective? This all needs to be documented (this is why I'm asking the questions)

Author: Added in the document.

### Goals

- Allow cluster admins to hide the user perspectives.
- Provide a way that cluster admins can do this based on resource permissions (RBAC).

### Non-Goals

- Validating the console resource in the operator and inform the cluster admins with an error because the operator
doesn't know the available perspectives provided by the console plugins.
- Allow cluster admins to customize the navigation menu along with perspectives for users or groups.

## Proposal

We can extend the existing `operator.openshift.io/v1` / `Console` CRD. 
We can add 
`spec.customization.perspectives` which can have list of customization details.

### Workflow Description

To disable perspective for users with limited permissions we need a list of options with a perspective id and the required permissions.

```text
├── Spec
│   ├── customization
|       ├── perspectives 
|           ├── id
|           ├── visibility
|               ├── state
|               ├── accessReview
|                   ├── required
|                       ├── group
|                       ├── resource
|                       ├── verb
└── ...
```

> This might be extendable in the future if we want replace (hide one, show another) a perspective based on a resource permissions:

Reviewer 3: How would you expect this to be extended? Do we need to make sure the API is extendable? What's the use case?

Author: Sorry, this was added for missingAccessReview check. I removed that line now. That is not required.

|                   |   ├── verb
|                   ├── missing
|                       ├── group
|                       ├── resource
|                       ├── verb
└── ...
```

Each perspective conforms to the following schema:

- `id: string` , defines the id of perspective to disable. Incorrect or unknown ids will be ignored.

- `visibility: object` , defines the state of perspective along with access review checks if needed for that perspective.

- `state: Enabled/Disabled/AccessReview` , defines the perspective is enabled or disabled or access review check is required.

// +optional
- `accessReview: object`, defines required and missing access review checks.

// +optional
- `required: authV1.ResourceAttributes[]` , defines a list of permission checks. The perspective will only be shown when all checks are successful.

// +optional
- `missing: authV1.ResourceAttributes[]` , defines a list of permission checks. The perspective will only be shown when at least one check fails.

`required` and  `missing` can work together esp. in the case where you 
want to show another perspective to users without specific permissions.

If both `required` and `missing`

> are not specified for `state: AccessReview`, access review check will be ignored and perspective will be enabled.

Reviewer 3: This seems unintuitive given the zero value of each check individually, see my comments on the API review for more

Author: As discussed with team, either one of required or missing will be present. Updated the doc as well.

Author: Regarding comment - https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1205#discussion_r966226188

The webhook cannot verify if the admin is trying to disable all the available perspectives because our perspectives are being contributed by dynamic extensions in the console code. We can definitely do this via the form experience.
